\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename simplemagic.info
@settitle SimpleMagic Documentation
@headings double
@c %**end of header

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------
@set simplemagic_version 0.6
@set simplemagic_year 2013
@set simplemagic_date May @value{simplemagic_year}
@set package SimpleMagic
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------

@titlepage
@headings off
@title SimpleMagic Package
@subtitle Version @value{simplemagic_version}
@subtitle @value{simplemagic_date}
@author Gray Watson

@page
This manual is licensed by Gray Watson under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 License.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this manual provided this license
notice and this permission notice are preserved on all copies.
@end titlepage

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------

@c In the printed manual, we put the contents at the front.  For the digital manuals it is at the end. 
@iftex
@contents
@end iftex

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Top, Quick Start, (dir), (dir)
@top SimpleMagic
@everyheading @thischapter @| @thispage @| @today{}

Version @value{simplemagic_version} -- @value{simplemagic_date}

@cindex introduction
@cindex author
@cindex simple magic
This package provides some simple magic value features that simulate the Unix file(1) command to determine the type of a file
or of @code{bytes} from the content.  It has an internal set of magic number information or it can process the magic files from
local ~Unix system configuration

To get started quickly using SimpleMagic, @pxref{Quick Start}.
@ifhtml
There is also a @uref{http://256.com/sources/simplemagic/docs/simplemagic.pdf, PDF version of this documentation}.
@end ifhtml
@iftex
There is also a @uref{http://256.com/sources/simplemagic/docs/simplemagic.html, HTML version of this documentation}.
@end iftex

Gray Watson @uref{http://256.com/gray/}

@menu
* Quick Start::                Start using SimpleMagic quickly.
* Using::                      How to use SimpleMagic.
* License::                    Open Source license for the project.
* Index of Concepts::          Index of concepts in the manual.
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Quick Start, Using, Top, Top
@chapter Start Using Quickly

@cindex getting started
@cindex how to get started
@cindex quick start
@cindex ContentInfoUtil
To use SimpleMagic you need to do the following steps.  For more information, @pxref{Using}.

@enumerate

@item Download SimpleMagic from the @uref{http://256.com/sources/simplemagic/releases/, SimpleMagic release page}.  @xref{Downloading}.

@item Optionally load in the magic entries from local file(s).  By default, if you construct a @code{ContentInfoUtil} instance
with the default constructor, it will load the internal magic entries file.  @xref{Loading Magic Entries}.

@item Use the @code{ContentInfoUtil} class to get content-types for files or @code{byte[]}:

@example
ContentInfoUtil util = new ContentInfoUtil();
ContentInfo info = util.findMatch("/tmp/upload.tmp");
// or   ContentInfo info = util.findMatch(inputStream);
// or   ContentInfo info = util.findMatch(contentByteArray);
System.out.println("Content-type is: " + info.getName());
@end example

@end enumerate

Once you have the @code{ContentInfo} it provides:

@itemize @bullet
@item Enumerated type if the type is common otherwise set to @code{UNKNOWN}
@item Approximate content-name
@item Full message produced by the magic file
@item Mime-type string if one configured by the config file
@end itemize

Here are some examples of @code{ContentInfo} output:

@itemize @bullet
@item HTML, mime 'text/html', msg 'HTML document text'
@item Java, msg 'Java serialization data, version 5'
@item PDF, mime 'application/pdf', msg 'PDF document, version 1.4'
@item GIF, mime 'image/gif', msg 'GIF image data, version 89a, 16 x 16'
@item JPEG, mime 'image/jpeg', msg 'JPEG image data, JFIF standard 1.01'
@end itemize

For somewhat more extensive instructions, @pxref{Using}.

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Using, Downloading, Quick Start, Top
@chapter Using SimpleMagic

@cindex how to use
@cindex using SimpleMagic
@menu
* Downloading ::                Downloading the SimpleMagic jar.
* Loading Magic Entries ::      Loading in the magic entries from files.
* Finding Content Info ::       Finding the content type from data.
* Content Info ::               Content type information returned.
@end menu

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Downloading, Loading Magic Entries, Using, Using
@section Downloading Jar

@cindex how to download the jars
@cindex downloading the jars
@cindex where to get new jars
To get started with SimpleMagic, you will need to download the jar file.  The @uref{http://256.com/sources/simplemagic/releases/, SimpleMagic
release page} is the default repository but the jars are also available from the @uref{http://repo1.maven.org/maven2/com/j256/simplemagic/,
central maven repository}.

The code works with Java 5 or later.

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Loading Magic Entries, Finding Content Info, Downloading, Using
@section How To Load Magic Entries

@cindex default magic entries
@cindex system magic entries
The library uses various magic byte information to be able to find and determine details about random blocks of bytes.
By default, SimpleMagic has a built in version of a magic file that was copied from a CentOS Linux system.  It contains, 
~2400 magic file entries describing a number of different file types.  It also has an additional ~6600 lines which provide
more details about the detected content types.

@cindex loading magic entries
@cindex magic files
The magic entries are relatively complex but in general look something like the following.  The configuration line says to
look at the start of the file for the string @code{"GIF8"}.  If it is there then the file is "GIF image data".

@cindex sample magic definition
@example
0       string          GIF8            GIF image data
@end example

@cindex alternative magic files
@cindex /etc/magic
If you do not want to use the internal magic definitions, you can also construct the @code{ContentInfoUtil} class with a file
or directory to have it parse and use another definition file.

@example
ContentInfoUtil util = new ContentInfoUtil("/etc/magic");
@end example

@emph{WARNING:} although we've tried to support different types of magic entries, there are local per-OS variations that may
not be supported.  

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Finding Content Info, Content Info, Downloading, Using
@section How To Find The Content Info

Once you have loaded the magic entry information into your @code{ContentInfoUtil}, you can use the utility class to find
the content info of files, byte arrays, or @code{InputStream}s.  The base method gets content info information from a
@code{byte[]}.

@example
byte[] uploadedBytes = ...;
ContentInfo info = util.findMatch(uploadedBytes);
@end example

You can also get the content type of a file which is read with a @code{FileInputStream}:

@example
ContentInfo info = util.findMatch("/tmp/uploadedFile.tmp");
// File uploadedFile = ...
// ContentInfo info = util.findMatch(uploadedFile);
@end example

If you have an @code{InputStream}, you can also use it directly:

@example
InputStream inputStream = ...
ContentInfo info = util.findMatch(inputStream);
@end example

For the file and stream versions, the first 10k of the data is read and processed.

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Content Info, License, Finding Content Info, Using
@section Content Information

Once you have the @code{ContentInfo}, it provides:

@itemize @bullet
@item Enumerated content-type if the type is common otherwise set to @code{UNKNOWN}.  This is determined by mapping the
mime-type string to an internal enumerated type and is not determined from the magic file entries.
@item Approximate content-name.  If the content-type is known then this will be a constant string.  If not know then this
is usually the first word of the full message from the magic file. 
@item Details about the content produced by the magic file.
@item Mime-type string if one configured by the config file.
@end itemize

Here are some examples of @code{ContentInfo} output:

@itemize @bullet
@item HTML, mime 'text/html', msg 'HTML document text'
@item Java, msg 'Java serialization data, version 5'
@item PDF, mime 'application/pdf', msg 'PDF document, version 1.4'
@item gzip, mime 'application/x-gzip', msg 'gzip compressed data, was "", from Unix...'
@item GIF, mime 'image/gif', msg 'GIF image data, version 89a, 16 x 16'
@item PNG, mime 'image/png', msg 'PNG image, 600 x 371, 8-bit/color RGB, non-interlaced'
@item ISO, mime 'audio/mp4', msg 'ISO Media, MPEG v4 system, iTunes AAC-LC'
@item Microsoft, mime 'application/msword', msg 'Microsoft Word Document'
@item RIFF, mime 'audio/x-wav', msg 'RIFF (little-endian) data, WAVE audio...'
@item JPEG, mime 'image/jpeg', msg 'JPEG image data, JFIF standard 1.01'
@end itemize

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------
@node License, Index of Concepts, Content Info, Top
@chapter Open Source License

@cindex license
@cindex open source license
This document is part of the SimpleMagic project.

Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any purpose with or without fee is hereby
granted, provided that this permission notice appear in all copies.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING
ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL,
DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS,
WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.

The author may be contacted via @uref{http://256.com/sources/simplemagic/}

@c ----------------------------------------------------------------
@node Index of Concepts,, License, Top
@unnumbered Index of Concepts

@printindex cp

@ifhtml
@contents
@end ifhtml

@bye
